---
layout: post
title: Reidemeister Moves &amp; Dowker Codes

---

Today we had two discussions. The first was trying to solidify our knowledge of Reidemeister moves. The second was about a naming scheme for knots, called _Dowker Notation_.

#### Reidemeister Moves

We compared work from over the weekend to see how things go. I could tell there was a lot of uncertainty about how these things work, but it looks sorted out now. We discussed the ups and downs of Reidemeister moves:

  - *Good*: standardized language for dealing with the question of "when are two knots the same?"
    Allows for easier record-keeping and communication. A sequence of pictures can be a proof!
    The moves are small little things so each is easy to understand

  - *Bad*: The moves are small little things, so often you need a looooooooong chain of them.
    This makes them inconvenient in some situations.

I will go on the record for the following notes. I think that the knots Nick and Reggie are the same, the knots Cole and Arianna are the same, and the knots Joellen and Lauren are the same. But none of those pairs is equivalent to any of the others. Is that true? Do you agree?

Then I shared with you a scheme for labeling knots invented by Dowker. The idea is to number the crossings as you travel along the knot. Then each crossing will get two numbers, and keeping track of those pairings of numbers will help you remember the knot.

We practiced with some examples. One of our examples was the knot Sarah. You all found a Dowker code for it, and then tried to reconstruct the knot from the code. I collected all the work and put it in [this file][dowkerfile] in the dropbox folder.

Lots of questions came up about Dowker notation.

  1. It looks like each knot has several different Dowker codes. Is there any way to understand
     this situation?
  2. It looks like each Dowker code can be turned into a knot, but there are several choices
     involved which make us uncertain. Can this situation be understood?
  3. It looks like magic that each crossing gets a pair of one even number and one odd number.
     Why is this always the case?

[dowkerfile]: https://www.dropbox.com/s/ygtdozx8q4iqtm7/DowkerCodes4Sarah.pdf?dl=0


Along the way, I mentioned the site [KnotInfo](http://www.indiana.edu/~knotinfo/). Go have a look and see some cool stuff.


### Assignment for Thursday 9/3:

1. Draw a few knots and make their Dowker codes. Make up some Dowker codes and turn them into knots. Start thinking about the questions above.

2. [*BIG TASK*] Suppose you have a knot $K$ and its Dowker code $[\text{string of numbers here}]$. What can you say about the change in the Dowker code if you perform each of the Reidemeister moves on $K$? Does this give you a way to recognize some kinds of Dowker codes that can (should?) be easily simplified?


